---
title: Introduction to category theory
author: haztecaso
---

**Lecturer**: Guillermo Gallego Sánchez

**Date**: 30/11/2021

**Time**: 16:00 CET

**Language**: Spanish

**Place**: Room 117

**Streaming link**: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6HVaIifGJzA](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6HVaIifGJzA).

#### Abstract

*Category theory takes a bird’s eye view of mathematics. From high in the sky,
details become invisible, but we can spot patterns that were impossible to de-
tect from ground level.*

-- <cite>Tom Leinster</cite>


Category theory gives the correct framework to describe some of the more
abstract and general properties in a lot of fields of mathematics. Essentially
categories are formed by "objects" and "maps" (morphisms) between them,
satisfying a "composition law".

One also studies "functors", which are "maps of categories", sending objects to
objects, maps to maps, and respecting the composition law.

Many important notions in mathematics admit a natural formulation in terms of
category theory, to the point that knowing it becomes a must at some level of
the career of a lot of mathematicians, specially those working in algebra or
geometry.

In this talk we will introduce the most basic elements of the theory, at a level
accesible to every undergraduate student in Mathematics.


#### Bibliography

- Francis Borceux, *A Handbook of Categorical Algebra - Volume 1: Basic Category Theory*, Cambridge University Press, 1994.
- Tom Leinster, *Basic Category Theory*, Cambridge University Press, 2014.
- Emily Riehl, *Category Theory in Context*, Dover Publications, 2017.


## Promotional poster
 <img src="/images/posters/category-theory.jpg" alt="Poster" style="width: 750px;"/>

<hr>

#### Resumen

*La teoría de categorías da una perspectiva de las matemáticas a vista de
pájaro. Desde lo alto del cielo, los detalles se hacen invisibles, pero podemos
descubrir patrones que eran imposibles de detectar al nivel del suelo.*

-- <cite>Tom Leinster</cite>

La teoría de categorías constituye el marco adecuado para describir muchas de
las propiedades más generales y abstractas de las matemáticas. Esencialmente,
las categorías están formadas por "objetos" y "aplicaciones" (morfismos) entre
ellos, satisfaciendo una "regla de composición".

También se estudian los "functores", que son "aplicaciones entre categorías",
enviando objetos a objetos, aplicaciones a aplicaciones, y respetando la regla
de composición.

Muchas nociones importantes de las matemáticas admiten una formulación natural
en términos de la teoría de categorías, hasta el punto de que conocerla se hace
indispensable a ciertos niveles de la carrera matemática, especialmente si se
trabaja en álgebra o en geometría.

En esta charla introduciremos los elementos más básicos de la teoría, a un nivel
accesible a cualquier estudiante de grado de Matemáticas.

